---
title: "Catalytic HCl oxidation reaction: Stabilizing efect of Zr-doping on CeO<sub>2</sub> nano-rods"
collection: publications
pubtype: 'journal'
date: 2018-12-30
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.08.047'
doi: '10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.08.047'
citation: 'C. Li, Y. Sun, F. Hess, I. Djerdj, J. Sann, P. Vöpel, P. Cop, Y. Guo, B.M. Smarsly, H. Over. <i>Appl. Catal. B</i> 239 (<b>2018</b>) 628-635.'
---

[Read @ Sciencedirect](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0926337318307859)

Highlights
----------
* Mixed Ce<sub>1-x</sub>Zr<sub>x</sub>O<sub>2</sub> nano-rods are active in the Deacon process at 430 °C.
* Chlorine is incorporated in the surface-near region of Ce<sub>1-x</sub>Zr<sub>x</sub>O<sub>2</sub> nano-rods: active phase.
* The stability of Ce<sub>1-x</sub>Zr<sub>x</sub>O<sub>2</sub> nano-rods depends strongly on the Zr-concentration.
* Thermodynamic modelling of Zr-induced stabilization of Ce<sub>1-x</sub>Zr<sub>x</sub>O<sub>2</sub> nano-rods.

Abstract
--------
Mixed Ce1-xZrxO2 nano-rod particles with varying Zr doping levels of up to 20% were exposed to Deacon reaction mixtures with high HCl concentration at a reaction temperature of 430 °C. The mixed Ce1-xZrxO2 nano-rod samples were characterized before and after Deacon reaction by x-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Pure CeO2 nano-rods are shown to suffer from bulk-chlorination of the catalyst (CeCl3x6H2O) for reaction mixtures HCl:O2 > 2 that is accompanied by dramatic activity losses. For a reaction mixture of HCl:O2 = 2.5:1, already 5% Zr doping suffices to stabilize the structure Ce1-xZrxO2 nano-rods against bulk chlorination. Although ZrCl4 is volatile above 330 °C, we do not encounter discharge of Zr from the fixed bed flow reactor as long as severe bulk chlorination of the Ce1-xZrxO2 catalysts in the form of CeCl3 is not observed in XRD. With a simple quasi steady-state model we can corroborate the stabilizing effect of Zr assuming that ZrCl4 evaporation is limited by diffusion of Zr4+ in the ceria-zirconia subsurface. As qunatified with XPS the chlorine concentration of stable and active Ce1-xZrxO2 nano-rods with 5% Zr is too high to be solely ascribed to on-surface chlorine. The incorporation of Cl into the surface-near region is further supported by XPS experiments performed after oxygen plasma treatment. For even more harsh reaction conditions HCl:O2 = 3:1 none of the Ce1-xZrxO2 nano-rods was stable at 430 °C. However, an increase of the reaction temperature to 500 °C enables even pure CeO2 nano-rods to be stable under such harsh reaction conditions.

Keywords
--------
* Deacon process
* Stability
* CeO2
* Nano-rods
* Zr-doping
